a. & m. karagheusian, inc. was a rug manufacturer headquartered at 295 fifth avenue in manhattan. manufacturing was located in freehold borough, new jersey and operated for 60 years before closing in 1964. it employed 1,700 people at its peak operation in the 1930s. bruce springsteen wrote about the karagheusian rug mill’s closing in his 1984 song "my hometown". a christmas carol; or, past, present, and future is a play in three acts (or ‘staves’) by edward stirling at the adelphi theatre in london on 5 february 1844. containing songs especially written for the show, the drama was adapted from the novella a christmas carol by charles dickens which had been published just weeks before in december 1843. by february 1844 eight other adaptations had already appeared on the london stage, including a christmas carol, or, the miser's warning! by c. z. barnett, which had opened at the surrey theatre in february 1844. stirling's version, however, was the only production to be sanctioned by dickens, who gave permission for the adaptation in january 1844.later, in his  memoirs, stirling wrote that dickens came to several rehearsals during which he made 'valuable suggestions'. dickens stated in his letters that he went to the adelphi to see the production but had mixed feelings about it. stirling revived his production in 1859.two woodcuts of scenes from the production, drawing heavily on the original illustrations by john leech, were published in the illustrated london news on 17 february 1844.the critic of the illustrated london news wrote of the production:

we have already given a slight sketch of this happy dramatic adaptation from dickens's admirable "romance of real life;" we will now proceed to illustrate it, more through the graphical agency of our artist than by anything we could ourselves indite.  of the production itself, from which the theatrical representation has emanated, we have nothing to say, but "plaudits" from beginning to end: it exhibits the author not only as a caricaturist, but a philanthropist, a satirist, and, unlike the censors of old, a moralist.  neither horace, juvenal, nor persius, could "touch the pitch" they wanted to make appear more black, "without defiling their own fingers," but dickens is never corrupted by his subject; he stands aloof and "shoots vice as well as folly" when it obtrudes itself upon his universal surveillance, with--
an arrow shot by virtue--barb'd by wit.

a review of 10 february 1844, again in the illustrated london news, stated:

dickens is a great man — a moral chemist who has analyzed the human heart to a nicety. "shewing the poison and the honey there."
his "christmas carol; or past, present, and future," dramatised by mr. stirling in a most sterling manner, from the prose story of the modern fielding, was produced on last monday with most decided success. the acting of o. smith, as old scrooge, the miser, was, throughout, admirable. wright as bob cratchit, the miser's clerk, presiding over his family party, was exceedingly droll. the story on which the piece is founded is too well known to enter into particulars of it: suffice it to say, that it is one of those home-bred, natural esculents that a true dramatic palate likes to enjoy, and as such, from its enthusiastic reception, will no doubt be universally relished, and ought to correct and improve the taste of those who fly to the continent ** for what can be so abundantly supplied at home. the proclamation for suppressing of pirates (also known simply as the act of grace) was issued by george i of great britain on 5 september 1717. it promised a royal pardon for acts of piracy committed before the following 5 january to those pirates who surrendered themselves to the correct authority before a deadline. originally, the surrender had to occur on or before 5 september 1718; this was later extended by a second proclamation to 1 july 1719.the proclamation also included bounties for the capture of pirates who failed to surrender before the deadline, as well as offering rewards for pirate crew members facilitating the capture of their captains.

 adraskan (pashto: ادرسکن) is a historical town in western afghanistan near the harut river. 
it was mentioned in 13th and 14th century geographies as one of four prominent towns in the district of sabzwar, the green place, which, now called shindand (pashto equivalent of sabzwar). now the town is the center of adraskan district in herat province, afghanistan. it is located on 33.6425°n 62.2672°e﻿ / 33.6425; 62.2672 at 1343 m altitude. the main kandahar–herat highway passes through the town.
during the soviet–afghan war, the 68th guards separate engineer battalion, 5th guards motor rifle division, 40th army, appears to have been located here. the 1582 cagayan battles were a series of clashes between the forces of the spanish philippines led by captain juan pablo de carrión and wokou (possibly led by japanese pirates) headed by tay fusa. these battles, which took place in the vicinity of the cagayan river, finally resulted in a spanish victory.abthis event is a recorded battle between european soldiers and sailors against japanese pirates, which followed similar events like the battles of manila and fukuda bay. the clash pitted spanish musketeers, pikemen, rodeleros and sailors assisted by allied native warriors against a larger group of japanese, chinese, and likely native filipino pirates made up of rōnin, soldiers, fishermen, and merchants (smugglers and legitimate). the pirates had a large junk, and 18 sampans which are flat bottomed, wooden fishing boats.

 an amazon standard identification number (asin) is a 10-character alphanumeric unique identifier assigned by amazon.com and its partners for product identification within the amazon organization. they were originated in 1996 by rebecca allen, an amazon software engineer, when it became clear that amazon was going to sell products other than just books. the 10-character format of the asin was adopted so that amazon databases and software, which were designed to expect a 10-character international standard book number (isbn) field, would not have to be changed to accommodate the new identification format. abhisheka (sanskrit: अभिषेक, romanized: abhiṣeka) means "bathing of the divinity to whom worship is offered." it is a religious rite or method of prayer in which a devotee pours a liquid offering on an image or murti of a deity. abhisheka is common to indian religions such as hinduism, buddhism and jainism. "(don't fear) the reaper" is a song by american rock band blue öyster cult from the band's 1976 album agents of fortune. the song, written and sung by lead guitarist donald "buck dharma" roeser, deals with eternal love and the inevitability of death. dharma wrote the song while picturing an early death for himself.
released as an edited single (omitting the slow building interlude in the original), the song is blue öyster cult's highest chart success, reaching #7 in cash box and #12 on the billboard hot 100 in late 1976. critical reception was positive and in december 2003 "(don't fear) the reaper" was listed at number 405 on rolling stone's list of the top 500 songs of all time. aesthetic emotions are emotions that are felt during aesthetic activity or appreciation. these emotions may be of the everyday variety (such as fear, wonder or sympathy) or may be specific to aesthetic contexts. examples of the latter include the sublime, the beautiful, and the kitsch. in each of these respects, the emotion usually constitutes only a part of the overall aesthetic experience, but may play a more or less definitive function for that state.

 abhay charanaravinda bhaktivedanta swami (iast: abhaya caraṇāravinda bhakti-vedānta svāmī; 1 september 1896 – 14 november 1977)  was an indian gaudiya vaishnava guru who founded iskcon, commonly known as the "hare krishna movement". members of iskcon view bhaktivedanta swami as a representative and messenger of chaitanya mahaprabhu.born in calcutta (now kolkata) in a suvarna banik family, he was educated at the scottish church college. while working at a small pharmaceutical business, he met and became a follower of bhaktisiddhanta sarasvati. in 1959, after his retirement, he left his family to become a sannyasi and started writing commentaries on vaishnava scriptures. as a travelling vaishnava monk, he became an influential communicator of gaudiya vaishnavite theology across india and the western world through his leadership of iskcon, founded in 1966. he was well regarded by a number of american religious scholars but was criticised by anti-cult groups.he has been subject to criticism over his racist views against blacks, discrimination against lower castes, anti-semitism, negative views on women, and advocacy of crimes of adolf hitler. abc-clio, llc (stylized abc-clio) is an american publishing company for academic reference works and periodicals primarily on topics such as history and social sciences for educational and public library settings. abc-clio provides service to fifteen different online databases which contain over one million online textbooks. the company consults academic leaders in the fields they cover in order to provide authority for their reference titles. the headquarters are located in santa barbara, california. the academy award for best animated short film is an award given by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences (ampas) as part of the annual academy awards, or oscars, since the 5th academy awards (with different names), covering the year 1931–32, to the present.
from 1932 until 1970, the category was known as short subjects, cartoons; and from 1971 to 1973 as short subjects, animated films. the present title began with the 46th awards in 1974. during the first 5 decades of the award's existence, awards were presented to the producers of the shorts. current academy rules, however, call for the award to be presented to "the individual person most directly responsible for the concept and the creative execution of the film." moreover, "[i]n the event that more than one individual has been directly and importantly involved in creative decisions, a second statuette may be awarded."only american films were nominated for the award until the national film board of canada (nfb) won with the romance of transportation in canada in 1952. (the first non-english-language international short to win was zagreb film's ersatz (the substitute) in 1961.)
the first film to win in this category was flowers and trees by walt disney, who has since held the category's record for most nominations (39) and most wins (12). mgm's tom and jerry (1940–67) is the category's most lauded animated series over all, being nominated for a total of 13 oscars and winning 7. warner bros.'s looney tunes/merrie melodies series also had a big amount of 16 oscar nominations and winning 5. among international studios, the nfb has the most wins in this category, with 6 oscars. the biggest showing from britain in this category is nick park, with three wins: 1 for creature comforts and 2 for the wallace and gromit series. 
the academy defines short as being "not more than 40 minutes, including all credits." fifteen films are shortlisted before nominations are announced. in the listings below, the title shown in boldface was the winner of the award in that given year, followed by the other nominees for that year. the 1550s decade ran from january 1, 1550, to december 31, 1559. a christmas carol is a 1908 silent film produced by essanay studios in chicago, and the first american film adaptation of charles dickens' famous 1843 novella of the same name. tom ricketts stars as ebenezer scrooge in the film, which is considered lost. adaptive reuse refers to the process of reusing an existing building for a purpose other than which it was originally built or designed for. it is also known as recycling and conversion. adaptive reuse is an effective strategy for optimizing the operational and commercial performance of built assets. adaptive reuse of buildings can be an attractive alternative to new construction in terms of sustainability and a circular economy. it has prevented thousands of buildings' demolition and has allowed them to become critical components of urban regeneration. not every old building can qualify for adaptive reuse. architects, developers, builders and entrepreneurs who wish to become involved in rejuvenating and reconstructing a building must first make sure that the finished product will serve the need of the market, that it will be completely useful for its new purpose, and that it will be competitively priced. the 3do interactive multiplayer, also referred to as simply 3do, is a home video game console developed by the 3do company. conceived by entrepreneur and electronic arts founder trip hawkins, the 3do was not a console manufactured by the company itself, but a set of specifications, originally designed by dave needle and robert j. mical of new technologies group, that could be licensed by third parties. panasonic produced the first models in 1993, and further renditions of the hardware were released in 1994 by goldstar (now lg electronics), and in 1995 by sanyo.
despite having a highly promoted launch (including being named time magazine's "1993 product of the year"), the console received mixed to negative reviews, and an oversaturated console market prevented the system from achieving success comparable to competing consoles from sega and sony. by 1996 3do saw no market in places like na and the eu. by mid-1997, the 3do opera hardware was sold to samsung. a general history of the robberies and murders of the most notorious pyrates is a 1724 book published in britain containing biographies of contemporary pirates, which was influential in shaping popular conceptions of pirates. its author uses the name captain charles johnson, generally considered a pen name for one of london's writer-publishers. the prime source for the biographies of many well-known pirates, the book gives an almost mythical status to the more colourful characters, and it is likely that the author used considerable licence in his accounts of pirate conversations. the book also contains the name of the pirate flag the jolly roger and shows the skull and bones design.
first appearing in charles rivington's shop in london, the book sold so well that by 1726 an enlarged fourth edition had appeared. it pandered to the british public's taste for the exotic; revelling in graphic stories on the high seas. english naval historian david cordingly writes: "it has been said, and there seems no reason to question this, that captain johnson created the modern conception of pirates." scottish novelists robert louis stevenson (author of treasure island) and j. m. barrie (author of peter pan featuring captain hook) both identified johnson's general history of the pyrates as one of their major influences, and stevenson even borrowed one character's name (israel hands) from a list of blackbeard's crew which appeared in johnson's book. abc software is a computer and video game software distributor founded in 1991. the initial company was located in switzerland, and is known as abc software switzerland. its subsidiary, abc software austria, was established in 1993. they were acquired by electronic arts on july 28, 1998. in the video game industry, aaa (pronounced and sometimes written triple-a) is an informal classification used to categorise video games produced and distributed by a mid-sized or major publisher, which typically have higher development and marketing budgets than other tiers of games.in the mid-2010s, the term "aaa+" was used to describe aaa type games that generated additional revenue over time, in a similar fashion to massively multiplayer online games, by using games-as-a-service methods such as season passes and expansion packs. the similar construction "iii" (triple-i) has also been used to describe high-production-value games in the indie game industry.

 discogs (short for discographies) is a database of information about audio recordings, including commercial releases, promotional releases, and bootleg or off-label releases. while the site was originally created with a goal of becoming the largest online database of electronic music, the site now includes releases in all genres on all formats. after the database was opened to contributions from the public, rock music began to become the most prevalent genre listed.as of 2 february 2023, discogs contains over 16 million releases, by over 8.4 million artists, across over 1.9 million labels, contributed from over 658,000 contributor user accounts – with these figures constantly growing as users continually add previously unlisted releases to the site over time. the discogs servers, currently hosted under the domain name discogs.com, are owned by zink media, inc. and located in portland, oregon, united states.

 affective design describes the design of user interfaces in which emotional information is communicated to the computer from the user in a natural and comfortable way. the computer processes the emotional information and adapts or responds to try to improve the interaction in some way. the notion of affective design emerged from the field of human–computer interaction (hci), specifically from the developing area of affective computing.  affective design serves an important role in user experience (ux) as it contributes to the improvement of the user's personal condition in relation to the computing system. the goals of affective design focus on providing users with an optimal, proactive experience. amongst overlap with several fields, applications of affective design include ambient intelligence, human–robot interaction, and video games. an afghan rug (or afghan carpet) is a type of handwoven floor-covering textile traditionally made in the northern and western areas of afghanistan, mainly by afghan turkmens and uzbeks. alternative press is an american entertainment magazine primarily focused on music and culture, now based in los angeles, ca. it generally provides readers with band interviews, photos, and relevant news. it was founded in 1985 by mike shea in cleveland, oh. the company is now looked after by mddn. abhinavagupta (c. 950 – 1016 ce: 27 ) was a philosopher, mystic and aesthetician from kashmir. he was also considered an influential musician, poet, dramatist, exegete, theologian, and logician – a polymathic personality who exercised strong influences on indian culture.abhinavagupta was born in a brahmin family of scholars and mystics who whose ancestors were immigrated from kannauj by the great king of kashmira, lalitaditya muktapida.  he studied all the schools of philosophy and art of his time under the guidance of as many as fifteen (or more) teachers and gurus.: 35  in his long life he completed over 35 works, the largest and most famous of which is tantrāloka, an encyclopedic treatise on all the philosophical and practical aspects of kaula and trika (known today as kashmir shaivism). another one of his very important contributions was in the field of philosophy of aesthetics with his famous abhinavabhāratī commentary of nāṭyaśāstra of bharata muni. 20th century studios (previously known as 20th century fox film corporation, or 20th century fox for short; commonly referred to as fox) is an american film production company headquartered at the fox studio lot in the century city area of los angeles. since 2019, it serves as a film production arm of walt disney studios, a division of disney entertainment, which is owned by the walt disney company. walt disney studios motion pictures distributes and markets the films produced by 20th century studios in theatrical markets.for over 80 years – beginning with its founding in 1935 and ending in 2019 (when it became part of walt disney studios) – 20th century fox was one of the then "big six" major american film studios. it was formed in 1935 from the merger of the fox film corporation and twentieth century pictures and was originally known as the twentieth century-fox film corporation (while owned by tcf holdings) as one of the original big five among eight majors of hollywood's golden age. in 1985, the studio removed the hyphen in the name and renamed as twentieth century fox film corporation, after being acquired by rupert murdoch's news corporation, which was shut down and replaced by 21st century fox in 2013, after spinning off its publishing assets. the acquisition of 21st century fox by disney took place on march 20, 2019, including 20th century fox. the studio's current name was adopted on january 17, 2020, to avoid confusion with fox corporation. on december 4, 2020, the company started using 20th century studios, inc. for the copyright of 20th century studios and searchlight pictures productions as a disney subsidiary. the abenaki people are an indigenous peoples of the americas located in the northeastern woodlands region. their religious beliefs are part of the midewiwin tradition, with ceremonies led by medicine keepers, called medeoulin or mdawinno. a design is a plan or specification for the construction of an object or system or for the implementation of an activity or process or the result of that plan or specification in the form of a prototype, product, or process. the verb to design expresses the process of developing a design. in some cases, the direct construction of an object without an explicit prior plan (such as in craftwork, some engineering, coding, and graphic design) may also be considered to be a design activity. the design usually has to satisfy certain goals and constraints; may take into account aesthetic, functional, economic, or socio-political considerations; and is expected to interact with a certain environment. typical examples of designs include architectural and engineering drawings, circuit diagrams, sewing patterns and less tangible artefacts such as business process models.

 afghanistan, officially the islamic emirate of afghanistan, is a landlocked country located at the crossroads of central asia and south asia. referred to as the heart of asia, it is bordered by pakistan to the east and south, iran to the west, turkmenistan to the northwest, uzbekistan to the north, tajikistan to the northeast, and china to the northeast and east. occupying 652,864 square kilometres (252,072 sq mi) of land, the country is predominantly mountainous with plains in the north and the southwest, which are separated by the hindu kush mountain range. kabul is the country's largest city and serves as its capital. as of 2021, afghanistan's population is 40.2 million (officially estimated to be 32.9 million), composed of ethnic pashtuns, tajiks, hazaras, uzbeks, turkmens, qizilbash, aimak, pashayi, baloch, pamiris, nuristanis, and others.
human habitation in afghanistan dates back to the middle paleolithic era, and the country's strategic location along the historic silk road has led it to being described, picturesquely, as the ‘roundabout of the ancient world’. popularly referred to as the graveyard of empires, the land has historically been home to various peoples and has witnessed numerous military campaigns, including those by the persians, alexander the great, the maurya empire, arab muslims, the mongols, the british, the soviet union, and most recently by a us-led coalition. afghanistan also served as the source from which the greco-bactrians and the mughals, amongst others, rose to form major empires. the various conquests and periods in both the iranian and indian cultural spheres made the area a center for zoroastrianism, buddhism, hinduism, and later islam throughout history.the modern state of afghanistan began with the durrani dynasty in the 18th century, with the durrani afghan empire being formed by ahmad shah durrani. the durrani empire led conquests in which, at its peak, encompassed land that spanned from eastern iran to northern india. however, dost mohammad khan is generally considered to be the founder of the first modern afghan state. following the durrani empire's decline and the death of ahmad shah durrani and timur shah, it was divided into multiple smaller independent kingdoms, including but not limited to herat, kandahar and kabul. afghanistan would be reunited in the 19th century after seven decades of civil war from 1793 to 1863, with wars of unification led by dost mohammad khan from 1823 to 1863, where he conquered the independent principalities of afghanistan under the emirate of kabul. dost mohammad died in 1863, days after his last campaign to unite afghanistan, and afghanistan was consequently thrown back into civil war with fighting amongst his successors. during this time, afghanistan became a buffer state in the great game between the british empire (in british-ruled india) and the russian empire. from india, the british attempted to subjugate afghanistan but were repelled in the first anglo-afghan war. however, the second anglo-afghan war saw a british victory and the successful establishment of british political influence over afghanistan. following the third anglo-afghan war in 1919, afghanistan became free of foreign political hegemony, and emerged as the independent kingdom of afghanistan in june 1926 under amanullah khan. this monarchy lasted almost half a century, until zahir shah was overthrown in 1973, following which the republic of afghanistan was established.
since the late 1970s, afghanistan's history has been dominated by extensive warfare, including coups, invasions, insurgencies, and civil wars. the conflict began in 1978 when a communist revolution established a socialist state, and subsequent infighting prompted the soviet union to invade afghanistan in 1979. mujahideen fought against the soviets in the soviet–afghan war and continued fighting amongst themselves following the soviets' withdrawal in 1989. the islamic fundamentalist taliban controlled most of the country by 1996, but their islamic emirate of afghanistan received little international recognition before its overthrow in the 2001 us invasion of afghanistan. the taliban returned to power in 2021 after capturing kabul and overthrowing the government of the islamic republic of afghanistan, thus bringing an end to the 2001–2021 war. although initially claiming it would form an inclusive government for the country, in september 2021 the taliban re-established the islamic emirate of afghanistan with an interim government made up entirely of taliban members. the taliban government remains internationally unrecognized.afghanistan is rich in natural resources, including lithium, iron, zinc, and copper. it is also the world's largest producer of opium, second largest producer of cannabis, and third largest of both saffron and cashmere. the country is a member of the south asian association for regional cooperation and a founding member of the organization of islamic cooperation. due to the effects of war in recent decades, the country has dealt with high levels of terrorism, poverty, and child malnutrition. afghanistan's economy is the world's 96th-largest, with a gross domestic product (gdp) of $72.9 billion by purchasing power parity. however, afghanistan remains among the world's least developed countries, ranking 180th in the human development index, while its per capita gdp (ppp) ranks 169th out of 186 countries as of 2018. the 19th (nineteenth) century began on 1 january 1801 (mdccci), and ended on 31 december 1900 (mcm).
the 19th century was characterized by vast social upheaval. slavery was abolished in much of europe and the americas. the first industrial revolution, though it began in the late 18th century, expanding beyond its british homeland for the first time during this century, particularly remaking the economies and societies of the low countries, the rhineland, northern italy, and the northeastern united states. a few decades later, the second industrial revolution led to ever more massive urbanization and much higher levels of productivity, profit, and prosperity, a pattern that continued into the 20th century.
the islamic gunpowder empires fell into decline and european imperialism brought much of south asia, southeast asia, and almost all of africa under colonial rule. it was also marked by the collapse of the large spanish and mughal empires. this paved the way for the growing influence of the british, french, german, russian, austro-hungarian, italian, and japanese empires along with the united states. the british boasted unchallenged global dominance after 1815.
after the defeat of france in the napoleonic wars, the british and russian empires expanded greatly, becoming two of the world's leading powers. russia expanded its territory to central asia and the caucasus. the ottoman empire underwent a period of westernization and reform known as the tanzimat, vastly increasing its control over core territories in the middle east. however, it remained in decline and became known as the sick man of europe, losing territory in the balkans and north africa.
the remaining powers in the indian subcontinent such as the maratha and sikh empires have suffered a massive decline and their dissatisfaction with the british east india company's rule led to the indian rebellion of 1857, marking its dissolution. india was later ruled directly by the british crown through the establishment of the british raj.
britain's overseas possessions grew rapidly in the first half of the century, especially with the expansion of vast territories in canada, australia, south africa, india, and in the last two decades of the century in africa. by the end of the century, the british controlled a fifth of the world's land and one-quarter of the world's population. during the post-napoleonic era, it enforced what became known as the pax britannica, which had ushered in unprecedented globalization on a massive scale. 18 is a collaborative studio album by guitarist jeff beck and actor, producer and musician johnny depp. released on 15 july 2022 on rhino records, it is beck's final studio album released before his death in january 2023.
the 13-track collection features two depp-penned originals and a selection of cover songs by killing joke, the beach boys, marvin gaye, the miracles, the velvet underground, the everly brothers and janis ian. upon release, the album received mixed reviews from music critics. 10 things i hate about you is an american television sitcom broadcast on abc family beginning in 2009. developed by carter covington, the show is a half-hour, single-camera series based on the 1999 film of the same name. it premiered on tuesday, july 7, 2009, at 8 pm. following its initial 10-episode run, a second set of 10 episodes aired from march 29, 2010, to may 24, 2010. the series was cancelled in april 2010.

 abshir abdillahi, known as "boyah" is a somali pirate.

 the acanthus (ancient greek: ἄκανθος) is one of the most common plant forms to make foliage ornament and decoration, and even as the leaf distinguishing the heraldic coronet of a manorial lord from other coronets of royalty or nobility, which use strawberry leaves. this article describes trends in popular music in the 2010s. see also 2010s in the music industry. advertising is the practice and techniques employed to bring attention to a product or service. advertising aims to put a product or service in the spotlight in hopes of drawing it attention from consumers. it is typically used to promote a specific good or service, but there are wide range of uses, the most common being the commercial advertisement.
commercial advertisements often seek to generate increased consumption of their products or services through "branding", which associates a product name or image with certain qualities in the minds of consumers. on the other hand, ads that intend to elicit an immediate sale are known as direct-response advertising. non-commercial entities that advertise more than consumer products or services include political parties, interest groups, religious organizations and governmental agencies. non-profit organizations may use free modes of persuasion, such as a public service announcement. advertising may also help to reassure employees or shareholders that a company is viable or successful.
in the 19th century, soap businesses were among the first to employ large-scale advertising campaigns. thomas j. barratt was hired by pears to be its brand manager—the first of its kind—and in addition to creating slogans and images he recruited west end stage actress and socialite lillie langtry to become the poster-girl for pears, making her the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product. modern advertising originated with the techniques introduced with tobacco advertising in the 1920s, most significantly with the campaigns of edward bernays, considered the founder of modern, "madison avenue" advertising.worldwide spending on advertising in 2015 amounted to an estimated us$529.43 billion. advertising's projected distribution for 2017 was 40.4% on tv, 33.3% on digital, 9% on newspapers, 6.9% on magazines, 5.8% on outdoor and 4.3% on radio. internationally, the largest ("big five") advertising agency groups are omnicom, wpp, publicis, interpublic, and dentsu.in latin, advertere means "to turn towards". fancypants hoodlum is the debut album by canadian musician merrill nisker, who later became famous under the name peaches. akira kurosawa (japanese: 黒澤 明, hepburn: kurosawa akira, march 23, 1910 – september 6, 1998) was a japanese filmmaker and painter who directed 30 films in a career spanning over five decades. he is widely regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers in the history of cinema. kurosawa displayed a bold, dynamic style, strongly influenced by western cinema yet distinct from it; he was involved with all aspects of film production.
kurosawa entered the japanese film industry in 1936, following a brief stint as a painter. after years of working on numerous films as an assistant director and scriptwriter, he made his debut as a director during world war ii with the popular action film sanshiro sugata (1943). after the war, the critically acclaimed drunken angel (1948), in which kurosawa cast the then little-known actor toshiro mifune in a starring role, cemented the director's reputation as one of the most important young filmmakers in japan. the two men would go on to collaborate on another fifteen films.
rashomon (1950), which premiered in tokyo, became the surprise winner of the golden lion at the 1951 venice film festival. the commercial and critical success of that film opened up western film markets for the first time to the products of the japanese film industry, which in turn led to international recognition for other japanese filmmakers. kurosawa directed approximately one film per year throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, including a number of highly regarded (and often adapted) films, such as ikirucode: jpn promoted to code: ja  (1952), seven samurai (1954), throne of blood (1957), yojimbo (1961) and high and low (1963). after the 1960s he became much less prolific; even so, his later work—including two of his final films, kagemushacode: jpn promoted to code: ja  (1980) and rancode: jpn promoted to code: ja  (1985)—continued to receive great acclaim.
in 1990, he accepted the academy award for lifetime achievement. posthumously, he was named "asian of the century" in the "arts, literature, and culture" category by asianweek magazine and cnn, cited there as being among the five people who most prominently contributed to the improvement of asia in the 20th century. his career has been honored by many retrospectives, critical studies and biographies in both print and video, and by releases in many consumer media. 100 greatest britons is a television series that was broadcast by the bbc in 2002. it was based on a television poll conducted to determine who the british people at that time considered the greatest britons in history. the series included individual programmes featuring the top ten, with viewers having further opportunity to vote after each programme. it concluded with a debate and final determination of the ranking of the top ten. although many living people were included among the top 100, all of the top ten were deceased. the athichudi (tamil: ஆத்திசூடி, romanized: āthichūdi) is a collection of single-line quotations written by avvaiyar and organized in alphabetical order. there are 109 of these sacred lines which include insightful quotes expressed in simple words. it aims to inculcate good habits, discipline and doing good deeds. achourya (sanskrit: अचौर्यः, iast:  acauryaḥ ) or asteya (sanskrit: अस्तेय; iast: asteya) is the sanskrit term for "non-stealing". it is a virtue in hinduism . the practice of asteya demands that one must not steal, nor have the intent to steal another's property through action, speech and thoughts.asteya is considered one of five major vows of hinduism and jainism. it is also considered one of ten forms of temperance (virtuous self-restraint) in indian philosophy. "downtown" is the first single from peaches' third album impeach my bush. "downtown" was the "single of the week" on xfm and chosen by nme as their choice single.  the single is also peaches' third to chart on the uk singles chart. the treaty of paris, signed in paris by representatives of king george iii of great britain and representatives of the united states on september 3, 1783, officially ended the american revolutionary war and overall state of conflict between the two countries. the treaty set the boundaries between british north america, later called canada and the united states, on lines the british labeled as "exceedingly generous". details included fishing rights and restoration of property and prisoners of war.
this treaty and the separate peace treaties between great britain and the nations that supported the american cause, including france, spain, and the dutch republic, are known collectively as the peace of paris. only article 1 of the treaty, which acknowledges the united states' existence as free, sovereign, and independent states, remains in force. abirami antati (tamil: அபிராமி அந்தாதி, romanized: apirāmi antāti) is a tamil collection of poems sung on goddess abirami, a deity venerated in thirukkadaiyur amirtaghatesvarar sivan temple, situated in tamil nadu, india. this poetry was composed by abirami bhattar (his birth name was subramanyam) who lived during the 18th century ce, a contemporary to serfoji i of tanjore. as a literary device or artistic form, an allegory is a narrative or visual representation in which a character, place, or event can be interpreted to represent a hidden meaning with moral or political significance. authors have used allegory throughout history in all forms of art to illustrate or convey complex ideas and concepts in ways that are comprehensible or striking to its viewers, readers, or listeners.
writers and speakers typically use allegories to convey (semi-) hidden or complex meanings through symbolic figures, actions, imagery, or events, which together create the moral, spiritual, or political meaning the author wishes to convey.  many allegories use personification of abstract concepts. the afl video game series is a series of australian rules football video games based on the afl. released originally by beam software, it has since been developed by several other game developers. a fish out of water is a 1961 american children's book written by helen palmer geisel (credited as helen palmer) and illustrated by p. d. eastman. the book is based on a short story by palmer's husband theodor geisel (dr. seuss), "gustav, the goldfish", which was published with his own illustrations in redbook magazine in june 1950. aarhus (, us also , danish: [ˈɒːˌhuˀs] (listen); officially spelled århus from 1948 until 1 january 2011) is the second-largest city in denmark and the seat of aarhus municipality. it is located on the eastern shore of jutland in the kattegat sea and approximately 187 kilometres (116 mi) northwest of copenhagen.
dating back to the late 8th century, aarhus was founded as a harbour settlement at the mouth of the aarhus river and quickly became a trade hub. the first christian church was built here around the year 900 and later in the viking age the town was fortified with defensive ramparts. the bishopric of aarhus grew steadily stronger and more prosperous, building several religious institutions in the town during the early middle ages. trade continued to improve, although it was not until 1441 that aarhus was granted market town privileges, and the population of aarhus remained relatively stable until the 19th century. the city began to grow significantly as trade prospered in the mid-18th century, but not until the mid-19th century did the industrial revolution bring real growth in population. the first railway line in jutland was built here in 1862. in 1928, the first university in jutland was founded in aarhus and today it is a university city and the largest centre for trade, services, industry, and tourism in jutland.
aarhus cathedral is the longest cathedral in denmark with a total length of 93 m (305 ft). the church of our lady (vor frue kirke) was originally built in 1060, making it the oldest stone church in scandinavia. the city hall, designed by arne jacobsen and erik møller, was completed in 1941 in a modern functionalist style. aarhus theatre, the largest provincial theatre in denmark, opposite the cathedral on bispetorvet, was built by hack kampmann in the art nouveau style and completed in 1916. musikhuset aarhus (concert hall) and det jyske musikkonservatorium (royal academy of music, aarhus/aalborg) are also of note, as are its museums including the open-air museum den gamle by, the art museum aros aarhus kunstmuseum, the moesgård museum and the women's museum kvindemuseet. the city's major cultural institutions include den gamle by, aros aarhus kunstmuseum, the moesgård museum, gender museum denmark, musikhuset aarhus and aarhus theatre. known as smilets by (lit. city of smiles) it is the danish city with the youngest demographics and home to scandinavia's largest university, aarhus university. commercially, the city is the principal container port in the country, and major danish companies such as vestas, arla foods, salling group, and jysk have their headquarters there. activity-centered design (acd) is an extension of the human-centered design paradigm in interaction design. acd features heavier emphasis on the activities that a user would perform with a given piece of technology. acd has its theoretical underpinnings in activity theory, from which activities can be defined as actions taken by a user to achieve a goal.when working with activity-centered design, the designers use research to get insights of the users. observations and interviews are typical approaches to learn more about the users' behavior. by mapping users' activities and tasks, the designer may notice missing tasks for the activity to become more easy to perform, and thus design solutions to accomplish those tasks. afghan refugees are citizens of afghanistan who were forced to flee their country as a result of wars, persecution, torture or genocide. the 1978 saur revolution followed by the 1979 soviet invasion marked the first major wave of internal displacement and international migration to neighboring iran and pakistan; smaller numbers also went to india or to countries of the former soviet union. between 1979 and 1992, more than 20% of afghanistan's population fled the country as refugees. following the soviet withdrawal in 1989, many returned to afghanistan, however many afghans were again forced to flee during the civil war in the 90s. over 6 million afghan refugees were residing in iran and pakistan by 2000. most refugees returned to afghanistan following the 2001 united states invasion and overthrow of the taliban regime. between 2002 and 2012, 5.7 million refugees returned to afghanistan, increasing the country's population by 25%.afghanistan is one of the largest refugee-producing countries in the world. as of 2021, there are 2.7 million afghan refugees, which is the third largest refugee group after syrian and venezuelan refugees.some countries that were part of the international security assistance force (isaf) established special programs to allow thousands of afghans to resettle in north america or europe. as stateless refugees or asylum seekers, they are protected by the well-established non-refoulement principle and the u.n. convention against torture. they receive the maximum government benefits and protections in countries such as australia, canada, germany, the united kingdom, and the united states. for example, those that receive green cards under 8 u.s.c. § 1159 can immediately become "non-citizen nationals of the united states" pursuant to 8 u.s.c. § 1452(b), without needing to meet the requirements of 8 u.s.c. § 1427(a). this allows them to travel with distinct united states passports. australia provides a similar benefit to admitted refugees.

 abkhaz neopaganism, or the abkhaz native religion, is the contemporary re-emergence of the ethnic religion of the abkhaz people in unrecognized abkhazia, a revitalisation which started in the 1980s. the most important holy sites of the religion are the seven shrines of abkhazia, each one having its own priestly clan, where rituals and prayers began to be restored in the 1990s.
according to the 2003 census, 8% of the population of abkhazia adheres to abkhaz neopaganism. on 3 august 2012 the council of priests of abkhazia was formally constituted in sukhumi. the possibility of making the abkhaz native religion one of the state religions was discussed in the following months. the academy awards, also known as the oscars, are awards for artistic and technical merit for the film industry. they are presented annually by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences (ampas), in recognition of excellence in cinematic achievements as assessed by the academy's voting membership. the academy awards are regarded by many as the most prestigious, significant awards in the entertainment industry in the united states and worldwide. the oscar statuette depicts a knight rendered in the art deco style.the major award categories are presented during a live televised hollywood ceremony that is typically held in february or march. it is the oldest worldwide entertainment awards ceremony. the 1st academy awards were held in 1929, the second ceremony in 1930 was the first one broadcast by radio, and the 1953 ceremony was the first one televised. it is also the oldest of the four major annual american entertainment awards; its equivalents – the emmy awards for television, the tony awards for theater, and the grammy awards for music – are modeled after the academy awards. abdon (hebrew: עַבְדּוֹן ‘aḇdōn, "servile" or "service"), was the son of hillel, a pirathonite, and was the eleventh judge of israel mentioned in the book of judges (judges 12:13–15). he was a member of the tribe of ephraim, and in the biblical account was credited with having forty sons and thirty grandsons. he restored order in the central area of israel "after the disastrous feud with jephtha and the gileadites".
he judged israel for eight years. he was buried on ephraimite land, in pirathon, in the hill-country of the amalekites. adrianne lee palicki ( pə-lee-ki; born may 6, 1983) is an american actress and model. she is best known for her starring roles as tyra collette in the nbc sports drama series friday night lights (2006–2011), as barbara "bobbi" morse/mockingbird in the abc superhero drama series agents of s.h.i.e.l.d. (2014–2016), and as commander kelly grayson in the fox/hulu science fiction comedy-drama series the orville (2017–present).palicki also had supporting roles in the films legion (2010), red dawn (2012), g.i. joe: retaliation (2013), and john wick (2014).

 in the philosophy of art, an interpretation is an explanation of the meaning of a work of art.  an aesthetic interpretation expresses a particular emotional or experiential understanding most often used in reference to a poem or piece of literature, and may also apply to a work of visual art or performance.

 in software development, agile practices (sometimes written "agile") include requirements discovery and solutions improvement through the collaborative effort of self-organizing and cross-functional teams with their customer(s)/end user(s), adaptive planning, evolutionary development, early delivery, continual improvement, and flexible responses to changes in requirements, capacity, and understanding of the problems to be solved. popularized in the 2001 manifesto for agile software development, these values and principles were derived from and underpin a broad range of software development frameworks, including scrum and kanban.while there is much anecdotal evidence that adopting agile practices and values improves the effectiveness of software professionals, teams and organizations, the empirical evidence is mixed and hard to find.

 the 1985 lahad datu ambush was a series of robberies and random shootings that occurred on 23 september 1985 when 15–20 armed foreign pirates landed on the coast of lahad datu, malaysia, and stormed the town. the pirates shot at random targets, killing at least 21 people and injuring 11 others, and stole some $200,000 from a local bank as well as another $5,000 from the malaysia airlines office.

 dotdash meredith (formerly about.com) is an american digital media company based in new york city. the company publishes online articles and videos about various subjects across categories including health, home, food, finance, tech, beauty, lifestyle, travel, and education. it operates brands including verywell, investopedia, the balance, byrdie, mydomaine, brides, the spruce, simply recipes, serious eats, liquor.com, lifewire, tripsavvy, treehugger, and thoughtco. in august 2012, about.com became a property of iac, owner of ask.com and numerous other online brands, and its revenue is generated by advertising. in addition to its manhattan headquarters, dotdash meredith maintains offices elsewhere in the new york metropolitan area, as well as in des moines, iowa, and birmingham, alabama. aesthetics of music () is a branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of art, beauty and taste in music, and with the creation or appreciation of beauty in music. in the pre-modern tradition, the aesthetics of music or musical aesthetics explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization. in the eighteenth century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment (plaisir and jouissance) of music.  the origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by kant.
aesthetics is a sub-discipline of philosophy. in the 20th century, important contributions to the aesthetics of music were made by peter kivy, jerrold levinson, roger scruton, and stephen davies. however, many musicians, music critics, and other non-philosophers have contributed to the aesthetics of music. in the 19th century, a significant debate arose between eduard hanslick, a music critic and musicologist, and composer richard wagner regarding whether instrumental music could communicate emotions to the listener. wagner and his disciples argued that instrumental music could communicate emotions and images; composers who held this belief wrote instrumental tone poems, which attempted to tell a story or depict a landscape using instrumental music. although history portrays hanslick as wagner's opponent, in 1843 after the premiere of tannhäuser in dresden, hanslick gave the opera rave reviews. he called wagner, “the great new hope of a new school of german romantic opera.”  thomas grey, a musicologist specializing in wagnerian opera at stanford university argues, “on the beautiful in music was written in riposte of wagner's polemic grandstanding and overblown theorizing.”  hanslick and his partisans asserted that instrumental music is simply patterns of sound that do not communicate any emotions or images.
since ancient times, it has been thought that music has the ability to affect our emotions, intellect, and psychology; it can assuage our loneliness or incite our passions. the ancient greek philosopher plato suggests in the republic that music has a direct effect on the soul. therefore, he proposes that in the ideal regime, music would be closely regulated by the state (book vii). there has been a strong tendency in the aesthetics of music to emphasize the paramount importance of compositional structure; however, other issues concerning the aesthetics of music include lyricism, harmony, hypnotism, emotiveness, temporal dynamics, resonance, playfulness, and color (see also musical development). the absheron carpet weaving school is one of the azerbaijani carpet weaving schools. the school covers the absheron villages: goradil, novkhani, surakhani, khilibuta, nardaran, bulbul, fatmai, mardakan, qala, khila, as well as the khyzy region. such centers of carpet weaving as gadi, khil, kesh, fyndygan and others are also known. abduwali abdulkadir muse (somali: cabdiweli cabdiqaadir muuse; pronounced [ʕɑbdɪwɛli ʕɑbdɪqɑːdɪr muːsɛ]; english pronunciation ; born 1990) is a convicted somali pirate. he is the sole survivor of four pirates who hijacked the mv maersk alabama in april 2009 and then held captain richard phillips for ransom. on 16 february 2011, muse was sentenced to 33 years and 9 months in u.s. federal prison.muse was portrayed by somali actor barkhad abdi in the 2013 film captain phillips, a dramatization of the hijacking.

 "boys wanna be her" is a song written and recorded by the canadian artist peaches, released as the second single from her third full-length album, impeach my bush. an alcoholic beverage (also called an alcoholic drink, strong drink, adult beverage, or a drink) is a drink that contains ethanol, a type of alcohol that acts as a drug and is produced by fermentation of grains, fruits, or other sources of sugar. the consumption of alcoholic drinks, often referred to as "drinking", plays an important social role in many cultures. most countries have laws regulating the production, sale, and consumption of alcoholic beverages. regulations may require the labeling of the percentage alcohol content (as abv or proof) and the use of a warning label. some countries ban such activities entirely, but alcoholic drinks are legal in most parts of the world. the global alcoholic drink industry exceeded $1 trillion in 2018.alcohol is a depressant, which in low doses causes euphoria, reduces anxiety, and increases sociability. in higher doses, it causes drunkenness, stupor, unconsciousness, or death. long-term use can lead to an alcohol use disorder, an increased risk of developing several types of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and physical dependence. as reported by who, alcohol is the highest risk-group carcinogen, and no quantity of its consumption can be considered safe; the temperance movement advocates against the consumption of alcoholic beverages and those who do not use alcoholic drinks are known as teetotalers.alcohol is one of the most widely used recreational drugs in the world, and about 33% of all humans currently drink alcohol. in 2015, among americans, 86% of adults had consumed alcohol at some point, with 70% drinking it in the last year and 56% in the last month. alcoholic drinks are typically divided into three classes—beers, wines, and spirits—and typically their alcohol content is between 3% and 50%.
discovery of late stone age jugs suggest that intentionally fermented drinks existed at least as early as the neolithic period (c. 10,000 bc). several other animals are affected by alcohol similarly to humans and, once they consume it, will consume it again if given the opportunity, though humans are the only species known to produce alcoholic drinks intentionally. 10 things i hate about you is a 1999 american teen romantic comedy film directed by gil junger and starring julia stiles, heath ledger, joseph gordon-levitt, and larisa oleynik. the screenplay, by karen mccullah lutz and kirsten smith, is a modernization of william shakespeare's comedy the taming of the shrew, retold in a late-1990s american high school setting. the film follows new student cameron (gordon-levitt) who is smitten with bianca (oleynik) and, in order to get around her father's strict rules on dating, attempts to get bad boy patrick (ledger) to date bianca's antisocial sister, kat (stiles). the film is named after a poem kat writes about her romance with patrick. much of the filming took place in the seattle metropolitan area, with many scenes shot at stadium high school in tacoma, washington.
released on march 31, 1999, 10 things i hate about you grossed over $60 million and received generally positive reviews from critics. it had breakthrough roles for stiles, ledger, and gordon-levitt, all of whom were nominated for various teen-oriented awards. the film has since developed a cult following and is considered a classic in the teen film genre. ten years later, it was adapted into a television reboot, which ran for 20 episodes and featured larry miller reprising his role as walter stratford. the annapolis convention, formally titled as a meeting of commissioners to remedy defects of the federal government, was a national political convention held september 11–14, 1786 at mann's tavern in annapolis, maryland, in which twelve delegates from five u.s. states (new jersey, new york, pennsylvania, delaware, and virginia) gathered to discuss and develop a consensus on reversing the protectionist trade barriers that each state had erected.  at the time, under the articles of confederation, each state was largely independent from the others, and the national government had no authority to regulate trade between and among the states.  new hampshire, massachusetts, rhode island, and north carolina had appointed commissioners, who failed to arrive in annapolis in time to attend the meeting, and connecticut, maryland, south carolina, and georgia had taken no action at all.   the convention also related to george washington's plans related to the waterways connecting the potomac and the ohio river. "aghajly" (azerbaijani: ağaclı) - azerbaijani  carpets belonging to the tabriz type. these carpets got their name not from the place of their production, but in accordance with their composition. thus, the composition of the middle field of these carpets mainly consists of one or more trees and bushes and, in rare cases, of a group of trees intended to represent a garden or forest. the trees are represented differently. the spring or autumn trees are usually in bloom or with fruits (pomegranates, apples), and sometimes these are cypress, willow, weeping willow and other ornamental trees.in the azerbaijan national carpet museum from baku, the aghajly carpet of the 19th century, and those by latif karimov (1965, 1974) are exhibited. the aghajly carpet, also made by kerimov in 1953, is kept in the azerbaijan national museum of art (baku). adaptive web design (awd) promotes the creation of multiple versions of a web page to better fit the user's device, as opposed to a single static page which loads (and looks) the same on all devices or a single page which reorders and resizes content responsively based on the device/screen size/browser of the user. 
this most often describes the use of a mobile and a desktop version of a page (or in most cases, the entire site), either of which is retrieved based on the user-agent defined in the http get request, which is known as dynamic serving. adaptive web design was one of the first strategies for optimizing a site for mobile readability, the most common practice involved using a completely separate website for mobile and desktop, with mobile devices often redirected to the mobile version of the site served on a subdomain (often the third level subdomain, denoted "m"; e.g. http://m.website.com/; and/or url parameters like &app=m&persist_app=1 used on youtube). today the use of two separate static sites for mobile and desktop viewing is being largely phased out, with server side scripting instead utilized to serve dynamically generated pages or to dynamically decide which version of a static page to serve, although the use of independent sites for mobile and desktop can still be frequently observed. while many websites employ either responsive or adaptive web design techniques, the two are not mutually exclusive, and best practices for the most universally readable designed content employ a combination of the two techniques to support a complete spectrum of hardware and software.the existence of separate front ends allows clients who experience technical issues with either to fall back to another, with the chance that the issue does not occur. "a job to do" is a song by american rock musician jerry cantrell, written for the end credits of the 2017 film john wick: chapter 2. the song premiered on billboard's website on february 9, 2017, and was featured on john wick: chapter 2 (original motion picture soundtrack) as the last track on the album. a lyric video featuring cantrell and keanu reeves was released on youtube on march 21, 2017. 
"a job to do" marks the first time cantrell released a solo song since 2002. the song was first played live on december 6, 2019, at cantrell's solo concert at the pico union project in los angeles. stanley earl kramer (september 29, 1913 – february 19, 2001) was an american film director and producer, responsible for making many of hollywood's most famous "message films" (he called his movies heavy dramas) and a liberal movie icon. as an independent producer and director, he brought attention to topical social issues that most studios avoided. among the subjects covered in his films were racism (in the defiant ones and guess who's coming to dinner), nuclear war (in on the beach), greed (in it's a mad, mad, mad, mad world), creationism vs. evolution (in inherit the wind), and the causes and effects of fascism (in judgment at nuremberg). his other films included high noon (1952, as producer), the caine mutiny (1954, as producer), and ship of fools (1965).
director steven spielberg described him as an "incredibly talented visionary" and "one of our great filmmakers, not just for the art and passion he put on screen, but for the impact he has made on the conscience of the world." kramer was recognized for his fierce independence as a producer-director, with author victor navasky writing that "among the independents...none seemed more vocal, more liberal, more pugnacious than young stanley kramer." his friend kevin spacey, during his acceptance speech at the 2015 golden globes, honored kramer's work, calling him "one of the great filmmakers of all time."despite uneven critical reception, both then and now, kramer's body of work has received many awards, including 16 academy awards and 80 nominations, and he was nominated nine times as either producer or director. in 1961, he received the irving g. thalberg memorial award. in 1963, he was a member of the jury at the 3rd moscow international film festival. in 1998, he was awarded the first naacp vanguard award in recognition of "the strong social themes that ran through his body of work". in 2002, the stanley kramer award was created, to be awarded to recipients whose work "dramatically illustrates provocative social issues". 20th century animation (originally known as fox family films, fox animation studios, and 20th century fox animation and sometimes referred to as fox animation) is an american animation studio located in century city, los angeles. formed in 1994, it is organized as a division and label of 20th century studios (formerly 20th century fox), a subsidiary of the walt disney studios, and is tasked with producing animated feature-length films.  at one point, 20th century animation had two subsidiaries: fox animation studios, which was shut down on june 26, 2000, and blue sky studios (the latter became the primary unit of 20th century animation), which was closed on april 10, 2021. walt disney studios home entertainment distributes the films produced by 20th century animation in home media under the 20th century home entertainment banner.the studio has produced a total of 30 feature films (six films as fox family films, three films from fox animation studios, thirteen feature films from blue sky studios, and eight original films), most of them being distributed by 20th century studios. their first film was mighty morphin power rangers: the movie and their first animated film was anastasia, with the most recent release being night at the museum: kahmunrah rises again.
anastasia (1997-1999), ice age (2002-present) and rio (2011-present) are the studio's most commercially successful franchises, while robots (2005), the simpsons movie (2007), horton hears a who! (2008), the book of life (2014), the peanuts movie (2015), spies in disguise (2019), ron's gone wrong (2021) and the bob's burgers movie (2022) are among its most critically praised films. the abrahamic religions are a group of religions centered around worship of the god of abraham. abraham, a hebrew patriarch, is extensively mentioned throughout the abrahamic religious scriptures of the quran, hebrew and christian bible.jewish tradition claims that the twelve tribes of israel are descended from abraham through his son isaac and grandson jacob, whose sons formed the nation of the israelites in canaan (or the land of israel); islamic tradition claims that twelve arab tribes known as the ishmaelites are descended from abraham through his son ishmael in the arabian peninsula.in its early stages, the israelite religion was derived from the canaanite religions of the bronze age; by the iron age, it had become distinct from other canaanite religions as it shed polytheism for monolatry. the monolatrist nature of yahwism was further developed in the period following the babylonian captivity, eventually emerging as a firm religious movement of monotheism. in the 1st century ce, christianity emerged as a splinter movement out of judaism in the land of israel, developed under the apostles of jesus of nazareth; it spread widely after it was adopted by the roman empire as a state religion in the 4th century ce. in the 7th century ce, islam was founded by muhammad in the arabian peninsula; it spread widely through the early muslim conquests, shortly after his death.alongside the indian religions, the iranian religions, and the east asian religions, the abrahamic religions make up the largest major division in comparative religion. by total number of adherents, christianity and islam comprise the largest and second-largest religious movements in the world, respectively. abrahamic religions with fewer adherents include judaism, the baháʼí faith, druzism, samaritanism, and rastafari. the 1796 united states presidential election was the third quadrennial presidential election of the united states. it was held from friday, november 4 to wednesday, december 7, 1796. it was the first contested american presidential election, the first presidential election in which political parties played a dominant role, and the only presidential election in which a president and vice president were elected from opposing tickets. incumbent vice president john adams of the federalist party defeated former secretary of state thomas jefferson of the democratic-republican party.
with incumbent president george washington having refused a third term in office, the 1796 election became the first u.s. presidential election in which political parties competed for the presidency. the federalists coalesced behind adams and the democratic-republicans supported jefferson, but each party ran multiple candidates. under the electoral rules in place prior to the twelfth amendment, the members of the electoral college each cast two votes, with no distinction made between electoral votes for president and electoral votes for vice president. the individual with the votes of a majority of electors became president, and the runner-up became vice president. if there was a tie for first place or no person won a majority, the house of representatives would hold a contingent election. also, if there were a tie for second place, the vice presidency, the senate would hold a contingent election to break the tie.
the campaign was a bitter one, with federalists attempting to identify the democratic-republicans with the violence of the french revolution and the democratic-republicans accusing the federalists of favoring monarchism and aristocracy. republicans sought to associate adams with the policies developed by fellow federalist alexander hamilton during the washington administration, which they declaimed were too much in favor of great britain and a centralized national government. in foreign policy, republicans denounced the federalists over the jay treaty, which had established a temporary peace with great britain. federalists attacked jefferson's moral character, alleging he was an atheist and that he had been a coward during the american revolutionary war. adams supporters also accused jefferson of being too pro-france; the accusation was underscored when the french ambassador embarrassed the republicans by publicly backing jefferson and attacking the federalists right before the election. despite the hostility between their respective camps, neither adams nor jefferson actively campaigned for the presidency.adams was elected president with 71 electoral votes, one more than was needed for a majority. he won by sweeping the electoral votes of new england and winning votes from several other swing states, especially the states of the mid-atlantic region. jefferson received 68 electoral votes and was elected vice president. former governor thomas pinckney of south carolina, a federalist, finished with 59 electoral votes, while senator aaron burr, a democratic-republican from new york, won 30 electoral votes. the remaining 48 electoral votes were dispersed among nine other candidates. several electors cast one vote for a federalist candidate and one for a democratic-republican. the election marked the formation of the first party system, and established a rivalry between federalist new england and the democratic-republican south, with the middle states holding the balance of power (new york and maryland were the crucial swing states, and between them only voted for a loser once between 1789 and 1820). the academy award for best documentary feature film is an award for documentary films. in 1941, the first awards for feature-length documentaries were bestowed as special awards to kukan and target for tonight. they have since been bestowed competitively each year, with the exception of 1946. copies of every winning film (along with copies of most nominees) are held by the academy film archive. an abaadeh carpet is a type of persian carpet made in the town of abadeh in iran. adimurai is a tamil martial art originating in modern-day kanyakumari, the southernmost region in india. it was traditionally practiced in the kanyakumari district of modern-day tamil nadu as well as nearby areas in southeastern kerala. its preliminary empty-hand techniques are called adithada and application of vital points are called varma adi, although these terms are sometimes interchangeably used to refer to the martial art itself. adimurai is a portmanteau in the tamil language where adi means "to hit or strike" and murai means method or procedure. in modern period it is used alongside other tamil martial arts. abimelech (; אֲבִימֶלֶךְcode: heb promoted to code: he  ’ǎḇīmeleḵcode: heb promoted to code: he ) was the king of shechem and a son of biblical judge gideon. his name can best be interpreted as "my father is king", claiming the inherited right to rule. he is introduced in judges 8:31 as the son of gideon and his shechemite concubine, and the biblical account of his reign is described in chapter nine of the book of judges. according to the bible, he was an unprincipled and ambitious ruler who often engaged in war against his own subjects. aaj ka samson is a 1991 indian hindi-language romance drama film directed by kukoo kapoor, starring hemant birje, sahila chadha, goga kapoor and puneet issar. it is modern reworking of the biblical tale of samson and delilah.

 achintya-bheda-abheda (अचिन्त्यभेदाभेद, acintyabhedābheda in iast) is a school of vedanta representing the philosophy of inconceivable one-ness and difference. in sanskrit achintya means 'inconceivable', bheda translates as 'difference', and abheda translates as 'non-difference'.

the gaudiya vaishnava religious tradition employs the term in relation to the relationship of creation and creator (krishna, svayam bhagavan), between god and his energies. it is believed that this philosophy was taught by the movement's theological founder chaitanya mahaprabhu (1486–1534) and differentiates the gaudiya tradition from the other vaishnava sampradayas. it can be understood as an integration of the strict dualist (dvaita) theology of madhvacharya and the qualified monism (vishishtadvaita) of ramanuja.

 aesthetics (also esthetics in american english) is a branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of beauty and taste, as well as the philosophy of art (its own area of philosophy that comes out of aesthetics). it examines aesthetic values, often expressed through judgments of taste.aesthetics covers both natural and artificial sources of experiences and how we form a judgment about those sources. it considers what happens in our minds when we engage with objects or environments such as viewing visual art, listening to music, reading poetry, experiencing a play, watching a fashion show, movie, sports or even exploring various aspects of nature. the philosophy of art specifically studies how artists imagine, create, and perform works of art, as well as how people use, enjoy, and criticize art. aesthetics considers why people like some works of art and not others, as well as how art can affect moods or even our beliefs. both aesthetics and the philosophy of art try to find answers for what exactly is art, artwork, or what makes good art.
scholars in the field have defined aesthetics as "critical reflection on art, culture and nature". in modern english, the term "aesthetic" can also refer to a set of principles underlying the works of a particular art movement or theory (one speaks, for example, of a renaissance aesthetic). acrylic fibers are synthetic fibers made from a polymer (polyacrylonitrile) with an average molecular weight of ~100,000, about 1900 monomer units. for a fiber to be called "acrylic" in the us, the polymer must contain at least 85% acrylonitrile monomer. typical comonomers are vinyl acetate or methyl acrylate. dupont created the first acrylic fibers in 1941 and trademarked them under the name orlon. it was first developed in the mid-1940s but was not produced in large quantities until the 1950s. strong and warm acrylic fiber is often used for sweaters and tracksuits and as linings for boots and gloves, as well as in furnishing fabrics and carpets. it is manufactured as a filament, then cut into short staple lengths similar to wool hairs, and spun into yarn.
modacrylic is a modified acrylic fiber that contains at least 35% and at most 85% acrylonitrile. vinylidene chloride or vinyl bromide used in modacrylic give the fiber flame retardant properties. end-uses of modacrylic include faux fur, wigs, hair extensions and protective clothing.

 ambrose of milan (latin: aurelius ambrosius; c. 339 – c. 397), venerated as saint ambrose, was a theologian and statesman who served as bishop of milan from 374 to 397. he expressed himself prominently as a public figure, fiercely promoting roman christianity against arianism and paganism. he left a substantial collection of writings, of which the best known include the ethical commentary de officiis ministrorum (377–391), and the exegetical exameron (386–390). his preachings, his actions and his literary works, in addition to his innovative musical hymnography, made him one of the most influential ecclesiastical figures of the 4th century.
ambrose was serving as the roman governor of aemilia-liguria in milan when he was unexpectedly made bishop of milan in 374 by popular acclamation. as bishop, he took a firm position against arianism and attempted to mediate the conflict between the emperors theodosius i and magnus maximus. tradition credits ambrose with developing an antiphonal chant, known as ambrosian chant, and for composing the "te deum" hymn, though modern scholars now reject both of these attributions. ambrose's authorship on at least four hymns, including the well-known "veni redemptor gentium", is secure; they form the core of the ambrosian hymns, which includes others that are sometimes attributed to him. he also had notable influence on augustine of hippo (354–430), whom he helped convert to christianity.
western christianity identified ambrose as one of its four traditional doctors of the church. he is considered a saint by the catholic church, eastern orthodox church, anglican communion, and various lutheran denominations, and venerated as the patron saint of milan and beekeepers. 1,3-propanediol is the organic compound with the formula ch2(ch2oh)2.  this 3-carbon diol is a colorless viscous liquid that is miscible with water. adi shankara, also called adi shankaracharya (sanskrit: आदि शङ्कर, आदि शङ्कराचार्य, romanized: ādi śaṅkara, ādi śaṅkarācārya, lit. 'first shankaracharya', pronounced [aːdɪ ɕɐŋkɐraːtɕaːrjɐ]), was an 8th-century indian vedic scholar and teacher (acharya). his works present a harmonizing reading of the sastras, with liberating knowledge of the self at its core, synthesizing the advaita vedanta teachings of his time.due to his later fame, over 300 texts are attributed to him, including commentaries (bhāṣya), introductory topical expositions (prakaraṇa grantha) and poetry (stotra). however, most of these are likely to be written by admirers or pretenders or scholars with an eponymous name. works known to be written by shankara himself are the brahmasutrabhasya, his commentaries on ten principal upanishads, his commentary on the bhagavad gita, and the upadeśasāhasrī. the authenticity of shankara being the author of vivekacūḍāmaṇi has been questioned and mostly rejected by scholarship.the central postulation of shankara's writings is the identity of the self (ātman) and brahman, defending the liberating knowledge of the self, taking the upanishads as an independent means of knowledge, against the ritually-oriented mīmāṃsā school of hinduism. shankara's advaita shows influences from mahayana buddhism, despite shankara's critiques; and hindu vaishnava opponents have even accused shankara of being a "crypto-buddhist," a qualification which is rejected by the advaita vedanta tradition, highlighting their respective views on atman, anatta and brahman.shankara has an unparallelled status in the tradition of advaita vedanta, but his influence on hindu intellectual thought has been questioned.until the 10th century shankara was overshadowed by his older contemporary maṇḍana miśra, and there is no mention of him in concurring hindu, buddhist or jain sources until the 11th century. the popular image shankara started to take shape in the 14th century, centuries after his death, when sringeri matha started to receive patronage from the kings of the vijayanagara empire and shifted their allegiance from advaitic agamic saivism to brahmanical advaita orthodoxy. hagiographies dating from the 14th-17th centuries deified him as a ruler-renunciate, travelling on a digvijaya (conquest of the four quarters) across the indian subcontinent to propagate his philosophy, defeating his opponents in theological debates these hagiographies portray him as founding four mathas ("monasteries"), and adi shankara also came to be regarded as the organiser of the dashanami monastic order, and the unifier of the shanmata tradition of worship.
the title of shankaracharya, used by heads of certain monasteries in india, is derived from his name. dance-punk (also known as disco-punk, punk-funk or techno-punk) is a post-punk subgenre that emerged in the late 1970s, and is closely associated with the disco, post-disco and new wave movements.

 the 2011 census of india or the 15th indian census was conducted in two phases, house listing and population enumeration. the house listing phase began on 1 april 2010 and involved the collection of information about all buildings. information for national population register (npr) was also collected in the first phase, which will be used to issue a 12-digit unique identification number to all registered indian residents by unique identification authority of india. the second population enumeration phase was conducted between 9 and 28 february 2011. census has been conducted in india since 1872 and 2011 marks the first time biometric information was collected. according to the provisional reports released on 31 march 2011, the indian population increased to 1.21 billion with a decadal growth of 17.70%. adult literacy rate increased to 74.04% with a decadal growth of 9.21%. the motto of the census was 'our census, our future'.
spread across 28 states and 8 union territories, the census covered 640 districts, 5,924 sub-districts, 7,935 towns and more than 600,000 villages. a total of 2.7 million officials visited households in 7,935 towns and 600,000 villages, classifying the population according to gender, religion, education and occupation. the cost of the exercise was approximately ₹2,200 crore (us$280 million) – this comes to less than $0.50 per person, well below the estimated world average of $4.60 per person. conducted every 10 years, this census faced big challenges considering india's vast area and diversity of cultures and opposition from the manpower involved.
information on castes was included in the census following demands from several ruling coalition leaders including lalu prasad yadav, and mulayam singh yadav supported by opposition parties bharatiya janata party, akali dal, shiv sena and anna dravida munnetra kazhagam. information on caste was last collected during the british raj in 1931. during the early census, people often exaggerated their caste status to garner social status and it is expected that people downgrade it now in the expectation of gaining government benefits. earlier, there was speculation that there would be a caste-based census conducted in 2011, the first time for 80 years (last was in 1931), to find the exact population of the "other backward classes" (obcs) in india. this was later accepted and the socio economic and caste census 2011 was conducted whose first findings were revealed on 3 july 2015 by union finance minister arun jaitley. mandal commission report of 1980 quoted obc population at 52%, though national sample survey organisation (nsso) survey of 2006 quoted obc population at 41%.there is only one instance of a caste count in post-independence india. it was conducted in kerala in 1968 by the government of kerala under e. m. s. namboodiripad to assess the social and economic backwardness of various lower castes. the census was termed socio-economic survey of 1968 and the results were published in the gazetteer of kerala, 1971. a christmas carol: a ghost story is a 2021 stage version of the 1843 novella a christmas carol by charles dickens. adapted by mark gatiss and directed by adam penford, the stage drama was originally scheduled to open in 2020 but was delayed owing to the covid-19 pandemic. it was eventually produced at the nottingham playhouse from 29 october to 20 november 2021 with a cast of 15 playing 50 characters and was filmed live for a cinema release during the stage run at the alexandra palace in london where it ran from 26 november 2021 to 9 january 2022. it received its cinema release on the 27th november and 1st december 2022 before it was shown on bbc four on 25 december 2022. a christmas carol. in prose. being a ghost story of christmas, commonly known as a christmas carol, is a novella by charles dickens, first published in london by chapman & hall in 1843 and illustrated by john leech. a christmas carol recounts the story of ebenezer scrooge, an elderly miser who is visited by the ghost of his former business partner jacob marley and the spirits of christmas past, present and yet to come. after their visits, scrooge is transformed into a kinder, gentler man.
dickens wrote a christmas carol during a period when the british were exploring and re-evaluating past christmas traditions, including carols, and newer customs such as cards and christmas trees. he was influenced by the experiences of his own youth and by the christmas stories of other authors, including washington irving and douglas jerrold. dickens had written three christmas stories prior to the novella, and was inspired following a visit to the field lane ragged school, one of several establishments for london's street children. the treatment of the poor and the ability of a selfish man to redeem himself by transforming into a more sympathetic character are the key themes of the story. there is discussion among academics as to whether this is a fully secular story, or if it is a christian allegory.
published on 19 december, the first edition sold out by christmas eve; by the end of 1844 thirteen editions had been released. most critics reviewed the novella favourably. the story was illicitly copied in january 1844; dickens took legal action against the publishers, who went bankrupt, further reducing dickens's small profits from the publication. he went on to write four other christmas stories in subsequent years. in 1849 he began public readings of the story, which proved so successful he undertook 127 further performances until 1870, the year of his death. a christmas carol has never been out of print and has been translated into several languages; the story has been adapted many times for film, stage, opera and other media.
a christmas carol captured the zeitgeist of the early victorian revival of the christmas holiday. dickens acknowledged the influence of the modern western observance of christmas and later inspired several aspects of christmas, including family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games and a festive generosity of spirit. action film is a film genre in which the protagonist is thrust into a series of events that typically involve violence and physical feats. the genre tends to feature a mostly resourceful hero struggling against incredible odds, which include life-threatening situations, a dangerous villain, or a pursuit which usually concludes in victory for the hero.
advancements in computer-generated imagery (cgi) have made it cheaper and easier to create action sequences and other visual effects that required the efforts of professional stunt crews in the past. however, reactions to action films containing significant amounts of cgi have been mixed, as some films use cgi to create unrealistic, highly unbelievable events. while action has long been a recurring component in films, the "action film" genre began to develop in the 1970s along with the increase of stunts and special effects.
this genre is closely associated with the thriller and adventure genres and may also contain elements of drama and spy fiction. screenwriter and scholar eric r. williams identifies action film as one of eleven super-genres in his screenwriters' taxonomy, claiming that all feature-length narrative films can be classified by these super-genres.  the other eleven super-genres are crime, fantasy, horror, romance, science fiction, slice of life, sports, thriller, war, western and vigilante. the 1791 united states senate election in new york was held on january 19, 1791, by the new york state legislature to elect a u.s. senator (class 1) to represent the state of new york in the united states senate. the election was conducted by a system of approval voting.
incumbent senator philip schuyler was not re-elected. aaron burr, attorney general of new york, won majority support in both the state senate and state assembly to succeed him. abraham samuel, also known as "tolinar rex," born in martinique (or possibly in anosy, madagascar), was a mulatto pirate of the indian ocean in the days of the pirate round in the late-1690s. being shipwrecked on his way back to new york, he briefly led a combined pirate-antanosy kingdom from fort dauphin (see tolanaro), madagascar, from 1697 until he died there in 1705. a child's history of england is a book by charles dickens. it first appeared in serial form in household words, running from 25 january 1851 to 10 december 1853. dickens also published the work in book form in three volumes: the first volume on 20 december 1851, the second on 25 december 1852 and the third on 24 december 1853. although the volumes were published in december, each was postdated the following year. they bore the titles:

volume i.   – england from the ancient times, to the death of king john (1852)
volume ii.  – england from the reign of henry the third, to the reign of richard the third (1853)
volume iii. – england from the reign of henry the seventh to the revolution of 1688 (1854)dickens dedicated the book to "my own dear children, whom i hope it may help, bye and bye, to read with interest larger and better books on the same subject". the history covered the period between 50 bc and 1689, ending with a chapter summarising events from then until the accession of queen victoria. in a letter to his friend douglas william jerrold, dickens confessed that he was composing the book so that he could prevent his children from embracing conservatism:

i am writing a little history of england for my boy ... for i don't know what i should do, if he were to get hold of any conservative or high church notions; and the best way of guarding against any such horrible result is, i take it, to wring the parrots' neck in his very cradle."
a child's history was included in the curricula of british schoolchildren well into the 20th century, with successive editions published from 1851 to world war ii. & juliet is a 2019 coming-of-age jukebox musical featuring the music of swedish pop songwriter max martin, with a book by david west read. the story focuses on a "what if" scenario, where juliet doesn't die at the end of shakespeare's romeo and juliet.
& juliet premiered at the manchester opera house in september 2019, before transferring to the  west end in november 2019. at the 2020 laurence olivier awards, & juliet received 9 nominations and won 3 awards, including  best actress in a musical for miriam-teak lee in the title role. the west end production was also received a record-breaking 13 nominations at the 2020 whatsonstage awards, ultimately winning 6 awards.

 a very good production is an american film and television production company founded by comedian, television host, actress ellen degeneres and warner bros. television's telepictures in 2003. it is known for producing the long-running series the ellen degeneres show.the company co-founded the former record label, eleveneleven in 2010. a christmas carol is a 1910 silent drama film directed by j. searle dawley and produced at edison studios in the bronx in new york city. after the 1901 british release scrooge, or, marley's ghost, this american version of charles dickens' 1843 novella is the second oldest surviving screen adaptation of the famous literary work. it features marc mcdermott as ebenezer scrooge and charles s. ogle as bob cratchit. electroclash (also known as synthcore, retro-electro, tech-pop, nouveau disco, and the new new wave) is a genre of music that fuses 1980s electro, new wave and synth-pop with 1990s techno, retro-style electropop and electronic dance music. it emerged in the later 1990s and is often thought of as reaching its peak circa 2002/2003. it was pioneered by and associated with acts such as i-f, dj hell, miss kittin and the hacker, and fischerspooner.